Replace cycles with epochs (#149)
ethereum/eth2.0-specs: specs/core/0_beacon-chain.md

```python
{

>     data: AttestationSignedData

Reviewer: And 👍 👍 👍  to this!

}
```

A `ProcessedAttestation` object has the following fields:

```python
{
    # Signed data
    'data': AttestationSignedData,
    # Attester participation bitfield (2 bits per attester)

>     'attester_bitfield': 'bytes',

Author: There are two bitfields, attester_bitfield and poc_bitfield. More modular that way :smile:

>     'attester_bitfield': 'bytes',

Reviewer: Ah I sorry, I mean the comment:

```python
    # Attester participation bitfield (2 bits per attester)
    'attester_bitfield': 'bytes',
    # Proof of custody bitfield
    'poc_bitfield': 'bytes',
```

Maybe just say "Attester participation bitfield" for `attester_bitfield`:
```python
    # Attester participation bitfield
    'attester_bitfield': 'bytes',
    # Proof of custody bitfield
    'poc_bitfield': 'bytes',
```

    return state.validators[index]
```

The following is a function that determines the validators that participated in an attestation:

```python

> def get_attestation_participants(state: State,

Reviewer: Should this update be part of #145 instead of this PR? If not, could you explain more about why we need two bits for having epochs?

The following is a function that determines the proposer of a beacon block:

```python

> def get_beacon_proposer_index(state:BeaconState, slot: int) -> ValidatorRecord:

Reviewer: Type hint:
```suggestion
def get_beacon_proposer_index(state:BeaconState, slot: int) -> int:
```

    first_committee = get_shards_and_committees_for_slot(state, slot)[0].committee
    index = first_committee[slot % len(first_committee)]
    return index
```

The following is a function that determines the validators that participated in an attestation:

```python

> def get_attestation_participants(state: State,

Reviewer 2: Seeds

    return state.validators[index]
```

The following is a function that determines the validators that participated in an attestation:

```python
def get_attestation_participants(state: State,
                                 attestation_data: AttestationSignedData,
                                 attester_bitfield: bytes) -> List[int]:
    sncs_for_slot = get_shards_and_committees_for_slot(state, attestation_data.slot)
    snc = [x for x in sncs_for_slot if x.shard == attestation_data.shard][0]
    assert len(attester_bitfield) == ceil_div8(len(snc.committee))
    participants = []
    for i, vindex in snc.committee:
        bit = (attester_bitfield[i//8] >> (7 - (i % 8))) % 2
        if bit == 1:
            participants.append(vindex)

>     return participants

Author: One important issue is that we are being a bit sloppy by returning validator entries and then casually mutating them, using that as shorthand for "do that edit in the state". It means that functions that seem like they're returning pure objects are actually returning pointers, which could confuse people.

One option would be to err on the side of returning indices always, and then add a shorthand notation `sv(i) = state.validators[i]` that we use everywhere.

>     return participants

Reviewer 3: Returning indices is sensible 👍 

Shorthand is fine, but not 100% needed

>     return participants

Author: Done.

First, some helper functions:

```python

> def min_empty_validator_index(validators: List[ValidatorRecord], current_slot: int):

Reviewer: Type hint
```suggestion
def min_empty_validator_index(validators: List[ValidatorRecord], current_slot: int) -> int:
```

### Verify attestations

For each `AttestationRecord` object `obj`:

* Verify that `slot <= block.slot - MIN_ATTESTATION_INCLUSION_DELAY` and `slot >= max(parent.slot - CYCLE_LENGTH + 1, 0)`.

> * Verify that `justified_slot` is equal to `justification_source if slot >= block.slot - (block.slot % CYCLE_LENGTH) else prev_cycle_justification_source`

Author: Replace >= with > ?

> * Verify that `justified_slot` is equal to `justification_source if slot >= block.slot - (block.slot % CYCLE_LENGTH) else prev_cycle_justification_source`

Reviewer 3: Don't think that fixes it.
The problem is with the block that triggers the state recalc. It might not even be at the cycle boundary.

We can check it with `last_state_recalculation_slot`

```suggestion
* Verify that `justified_slot` is equal to `justification_source if slot >= state.last_state_recalculation_slot else prev_cycle_justification_source`
```

### Verify attestations

For each `AttestationRecord` object `obj`:

* Verify that `slot <= block.slot - MIN_ATTESTATION_INCLUSION_DELAY` and `slot >= max(parent.slot - CYCLE_LENGTH + 1, 0)`.
* Verify that `justified_slot` is equal to or earlier than `last_justified_slot`.
* Verify that `justified_block_hash` is the hash of the block in the current chain at the slot -- `justified_slot`.
* Verify that either `last_crosslink_hash` or `shard_block_hash` equals `state.crosslinks[shard].shard_block_hash`.

> * Compute `full_parent_hashes` = `[get_block_hash(state, block, slot - CYCLE_LENGTH + i) for i in range(1, CYCLE_LENGTH - len(parent_hashes) + 1)] + parent_hashes` (eg, if `CYCLE_LENGTH = 4`, `slot = 5`, the actual block hashes starting from slot 0 are `Z A B C D E F G H I J`, and `parent_hashes = [D', E']` then `parent_hashes = [B, C, D' E']`). Note that when *creating* an attestation for a block, the hash of that block itself won't yet be in the `state`, so you would need to add it explicitly.

Reviewer: Should that be "and `parent_hashes = [D', E']` then the `full_parent_hashes = [B, C, D' E']`"?

* If `justification_source == prev_s - CYCLE_LENGTH and state.justified_slot_bitfield % 8 == 7`, set `last_finalized_slot = justification_source`.
* Set `prev_cycle_justification_source = justification_source` and `justification_source = new_justification_source`.

For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj`:

* If `3 * total_attesting_balance(obj) >= 2 * total_balance(obj)`, set `crosslinks[shard] = CrosslinkRecord(slot=last_state_recalculation_slot + CYCLE_LENGTH, hash=winning_hash(obj))`.

#### Balance recalculations related to FFG rewards

Note: When applying penalties in the following balance recalculations implementers should make sure the `uint64` does not underflow.

* Let `total_balance_in_eth = total_balance // GWEI_PER_ETH`.
* Let `reward_quotient = BASE_REWARD_QUOTIENT * int_sqrt(total_balance_in_eth)`. (The per-slot maximum interest rate is `2/reward_quotient`.)
* Let `quadratic_penalty_quotient = SQRT_E_DROP_TIME**2`. (The portion lost by offline validators after `D` cycles is about `D*D/2/quadratic_penalty_quotient`.)
* Let `time_since_finality = slot - last_finalized_slot`.

Case 1: `time_since_finality <= 4 * CYCLE_LENGTH`:

> * Any validator `V` in `prev_s_attesters` gains `adjust_for_inclusion_distance(balance_at_stake(V) // reward_quotient * (prev_s_attesters - total_balance) // total_balance, inclusion_distance(V))``.

Reviewer 4: Formatting issue with double tick ``

Reviewer 4: Also use lowercase `v` throughout.

* Any active validator `V` not in `prev_s_attesters` loses `balance_at_stake(V) // reward_quotient`.

Case 2: `time_since_finality > 4 * CYCLE_LENGTH`:

* Any validator in `prev_s_attesters` sees their balance unchanged.
* Any active validator `V` not in `prev_s_attesters`, and any validator with `status == PENALIZED`, loses `balance_at_stake(V) // reward_quotient + balance_at_stake(V) * time_since_finality // quadratic_penalty_quotient`.

For each `V` in `prev_s_attesters`, the validator `proposer = get_beacon_proposer(state, inclusion_slot(V))` gains `balance_at_stake(proposer) // INCLUDER_REWARD_QUOTIENT`.

#### Balance recalculations related to crosslink rewards

For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj` in `shard_and_committee_for_slots[:CYCLE_LENGTH]` (ie. the objects corresponding to the slot before the current one), for each `v in obj.committee`, where `V = state.validators[b]` adjust balances as follows:

> * If `v in attesting_validators(obj)`, `V.balance += adjust_for_inclusion_distance(balance_at_stake(V) // reward_quotient * total_attesting_balance(obj) // total_balance(obj)), inclusion_distance(V))`.

Reviewer 4: Notation mismatch with `v` and `V`

## Cycle boundary processing

Repeat the steps in this section while `block.slot - last_state_recalculation_slot >= CYCLE_LENGTH`. For simplicity, we'll use `s` as `last_state_recalculation_slot`.

_Note: `last_state_recalculation_slot` will always be a multiple of `CYCLE_LENGTH`. In the "happy case", this process will trigger, and loop once, every time `block.slot` passes a new exact multiple of `CYCLE_LENGTH`, but if a chain skips more than an entire cycle then the loop may run multiple times, incrementing `last_state_recalculation_slot` by `CYCLE_LENGTH` with each iteration._

#### Precomputation

* Let `active_validators = [state.validators[i] for i in get_active_validator_indices(state.validators)]`.
* Let `total_balance = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in active_validators])`.
* Let `this_cycle_attestations = [a for a in state.pending_attestations if s <= a.slot < s + CYCLE_LENGTH]`. (note: this is the set of attestations _of slots in the cycle `s...s+CYCLE_LENGTH-1`_, not attestations _that got included in the chain during the cycle `s...s+CYCLE_LENGTH-1`_)
* Let `prev_cycle_attestations = [a for a in state.pending_attestations if s - CYCLE_LENGTH <= a.slot < s]`.

> * Let `this_cycle_s_attestations = [a for a in this_cycle_attestations if get_block_hash(state, block, s) in a.parent_hashes and a.justified_slot == state.justification_source]`.

Reviewer 3: It is very unclear what is going on here and in the next line.

What does `this_cycle_s_attestations` mean?
Why are we checking to see if the current block is in `a.parent_hashes`? `a.parent_hashes` is the oblique hashes, right? This seems wrong. The current block should _never_ be in `a.parent_hashes`

I'm not in favor of changing `Attestation.oblique_parent_hashes` to `parent_hashes`. `parent_hashes` is very unclear imo.

* Let `s_attesters` be the union of the validator index sets given by `[get_attestation_participants(state, a) for a in this_cycle_s_attestations]`.
* Let `prev_s_attesters` be the union of the validator index sets given by `[get_attestation_participants(state, a) for a in prev_s_attestations]`.
* Let `total_balance_attesting_at_s = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in s_attesters])`.
* Let `total_balance_attesting_at_prev_s = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in prev_s_attesters])`.
* For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj` in `shard_and_committee_for_slots`, let:
    * `attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)` be the union of the validator index sets given by `[get_attestation_participants(state, a) for a in this_cycle_attestations + prev_cycle_attestations if a.shard == obj.shard and a.shard_block_hash == shard_block_hash]`
    * `attesting_validators(obj)` be equal to `attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)` for the value of `shard_block_hash` such that `sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)])` is maximized (ties broken by favoring lower `shard_block_hash` values)

>     * `total_attesting_balance(obj)` be the maximal sum balance

Reviewer 3: This is unclear. Maybe
```suggestion
    * `total_attesting_balance(obj)` be the sum of the `balance_at_stake` of the `attestation_validators`
```

    * `winning_hash(obj)` be the winning `shard_block_hash` value
    * `total_balance(obj) = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in obj.committee])`
    

> Let `inclusion_slot(a)` equal the slot in which attestation `a` was included, and `inclusion_distance(a) = inclusion_slot(a) - a.slot`. Let `inclusion_slot(v)` equal `inclusion_distance(a)` for the attestation `a` where `v` is in `get_attestation_participants(state, a)`, and define `inclusion_distance(v)` similarly. We define a function `adjust_for_inclusion_distance(magnitude, dist)` which adjusts the reward of an attestation based on how long it took to get included (the longer, the lower the reward). Returns a value between 0 and `magnitude`

Reviewer 3: `inclusion_slot` is not directly known by the state at this point. The client would have to do caching or windback to find it.

Overloading `inclusion_slot` and `inclusion_distance` is confusing. I think we should prefer an alternative name.

```python
def adjust_for_inclusion_distance(magnitude: int, dist: int) -> int:
    return magnitude // 2 + (magnitude // 2) * MIN_ATTESTATION_INCLUSION_DELAY // dist
```

#### Adjust justified slots and crosslink status

* Set `state.justified_slot_bitfield = (state.justified_slot_bitfield * 2) % 2**64`.

> * If `3 * total_balance_attesting_at_prev_s >= 2 * total_balance` then set `state.justified_slot_bitfield &= 2` (ie. flip the second lowest bit to 1) and `new_justification_source = prev_s`.

Reviewer 3: `prev_s` is undefined.

* If `3 * total_balance_attesting_at_s >= 2 * total_balance` then set `state.justified_slot_bitfield &= 1` (ie. flip the lowest bit to 1) and `new_justification_source = s`.

> * If `justification_source == prev_s and state.justified_slot_bitfield % 4 == 3`, set `last_finalized_slot = justification_source`.

Reviewer 3: `state.` is implicit when referencing `justification_source` and `last_finalized_slot` in this section. Consider making explicit

* If `justification_source == prev_s - 2 * CYCLE_LENGTH and state.justified_slot_bitfield % 16 in (15, 14)`, set `last_finalized_slot = justification_source`.
* If `justification_source == prev_s - CYCLE_LENGTH and state.justified_slot_bitfield % 8 == 7`, set `last_finalized_slot = justification_source`.

> * Set `prev_cycle_justification_source = justification_source` and `justification_source = new_justification_source`.

Reviewer 3: There's a chance that `new_justification_source` is not defined when reaching this line.

For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj`:

* If `3 * total_attesting_balance(obj) >= 2 * total_balance(obj)`, set `crosslinks[shard] = CrosslinkRecord(slot=last_state_recalculation_slot + CYCLE_LENGTH, hash=winning_hash(obj))`.

#### Balance recalculations related to FFG rewards

Note: When applying penalties in the following balance recalculations implementers should make sure the `uint64` does not underflow.

* Let `total_balance_in_eth = total_balance // GWEI_PER_ETH`.
* Let `reward_quotient = BASE_REWARD_QUOTIENT * int_sqrt(total_balance_in_eth)`. (The per-slot maximum interest rate is `2/reward_quotient`.)
* Let `quadratic_penalty_quotient = SQRT_E_DROP_TIME**2`. (The portion lost by offline validators after `D` cycles is about `D*D/2/quadratic_penalty_quotient`.)

> * Let `time_since_finality = slot - last_finalized_slot`.

Reviewer 3: considering using `state.last_finalized_slot`

Case 1: `time_since_finality <= 4 * CYCLE_LENGTH`:

> * Any validator `v` in `prev_s_attesters` gains `adjust_for_inclusion_distance(balance_at_stake(v) // reward_quotient * (prev_s_attesters - total_balance) // total_balance, inclusion_distance(v))`.

Reviewer 3: Define in a line above
```
* Let `base_reward_magnitude = balance_at_stake(v) // reward_quotient * (prev_s_attesters - total_balance) // total_balance`
```

* Any active validator `v` not in `prev_s_attesters` loses `balance_at_stake(v) // reward_quotient`.

Case 2: `time_since_finality > 4 * CYCLE_LENGTH`:

* Any validator in `prev_s_attesters` sees their balance unchanged.
* Any active validator `v` not in `prev_s_attesters`, and any validator with `status == PENALIZED`, loses `balance_at_stake(v) // reward_quotient + balance_at_stake(v) * time_since_finality // quadratic_penalty_quotient`.

For each `v` in `prev_s_attesters`, the validator `proposer = get_beacon_proposer(state, inclusion_slot(v))` gains `balance_at_stake(proposer) // INCLUDER_REWARD_QUOTIENT`.

#### Balance recalculations related to crosslink rewards

> For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj` in `shard_and_committee_for_slots[:CYCLE_LENGTH]` (ie. the objects corresponding to the slot before the current one), for each `v in obj.committee`, where `v = state.validators[b]` adjust balances as follows:

Reviewer 3: "to the slot before the current one" is unclear

Reviewer 3: Is it "to the cycle before the current one"?

> For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj` in `shard_and_committee_for_slots[:CYCLE_LENGTH]` (ie. the objects corresponding to the slot before the current one), for each `v in obj.committee`, where `v = state.validators[b]` adjust balances as follows:

Reviewer 3: `b` is unclear and undefined in the line `v = state.validators[b]`

* Let `prev_cycle_boundary_attesting_balance = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in prev_cycle_boundary_attesters])`.

For every `ShardAndCommittee` object `obj` in `shard_and_committee_for_slots`, let:

* `attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)` be the union of the validator index sets given by `[get_attestation_participants(state, a.data, a.attester_bitfield) for a in this_cycle_attestations + prev_cycle_attestations if a.shard == obj.shard and a.shard_block_hash == shard_block_hash]`
* `attesting_validators(obj)` be equal to `attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)` for the value of `shard_block_hash` such that `sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in attesting_validators(obj, shard_block_hash)])` is maximized (ties broken by favoring lower `shard_block_hash` values)
* `total_attesting_balance(obj)` be the sum of the balances-at-stake of `attesting_validators(obj)`
* `winning_hash(obj)` be the winning `shard_block_hash` value
* `total_balance(obj) = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in obj.committee])`
    

> Let `inclusion_slot(v)` equal `a.slot_included` for the attestation `a` where `v` is in `get_attestation_participants(state, a.data, a.attester_bitfield)`, and `inclusion_distance(v) = a.slot_included - a.data.slot` for the same attestation. We define a function `adjust_for_inclusion_distance(magnitude, dist)` which adjusts the reward of an attestation based on how long it took to get included (the longer, the lower the reward). Returns a value between 0 and `magnitude`

Author: I'd say keep the words to "between 0 and magnitude". We could decide to change the function later on to have a floor lower than magnitude//2; the only guarantee we're committing to is "0 <= answer <= magnitude"

* `total_attesting_balance(obj)` be the sum of the balances-at-stake of `attesting_validators(obj)`
* `winning_hash(obj)` be the winning `shard_block_hash` value
* `total_balance(obj) = sum([balance_at_stake(v) for v in obj.committee])`
    
Let `inclusion_slot(v)` equal `a.slot_included` for the attestation `a` where `v` is in `get_attestation_participants(state, a.data, a.attester_bitfield)`, and `inclusion_distance(v) = a.slot_included - a.data.slot` for the same attestation. We define a function `adjust_for_inclusion_distance(magnitude, dist)` which adjusts the reward of an attestation based on how long it took to get included (the longer, the lower the reward). Returns a value between 0 and `magnitude`

```python
def adjust_for_inclusion_distance(magnitude: int, dist: int) -> int:
    return magnitude // 2 + (magnitude // 2) * MIN_ATTESTATION_INCLUSION_DELAY // dist
```

For any validator `v`, `base_reward(v) = balance_at_stake(v) // reward_quotient`

Miscellaneous:

* Let `quadratic_penalty_quotient = SQRT_E_DROP_TIME**2`. (The portion lost by offline validators after `D` cycles is about `D*D/2/quadratic_penalty_quotient`.)

> * Let `time_since_finality = block.slot - state.last_finalized_slot`.

Reviewer 3: `time_since_finality` needs to be defined after the next section because `state.last_finalized_slot` might have been updated

(last nitpick for now. sorry!)

* If for any `x` in `state.candidate_pow_receipt_root`,  `x.votes * 2 >= POW_RECEIPT_ROOT_VOTING_PERIOD` set `state.processed_pow_receipt_root = x.receipt_root`.
* Set `state.candidate_pow_receipt_roots = []`.

> #### Proposer reshuffling

Reviewer 3: Why did we move this here?

Author: Aah, I think my goal was to move it out of the then-overloaded "Finally" section. We could move it to happen right before Finally if desired. I'm not sure what order is best.

Reviewer 3: The order doesn't particularly matter (I think). 

The only reason I noticed was -- if we have it before the change validator section then it might produce some `ShardReassignmentRecord`s that immediately get wiped out when removing validators in `change_validators`.

Again... not a pressing concern

    withdrawable_validators = sorted(filter(withdrawable, validators), key=lambda v: v.exit_seq)
    for v in withdrawable_validators[:WITHDRAWALS_PER_CYCLE]:
        if v.status == PENALIZED:
            v.balance -= balance_at_stake(v) * min(total_penalties * 3, total_balance) // total_balance
        v.status = WITHDRAWN
        v.last_status_change_slot = current_slot

        withdraw_amount = v.balance
        # STUB: withdraw to shard chain    
```

And perform the following updates to the `state`:

> * Set `state.validator_set_change_slot = s`

Reviewer 3: This actually needs to be `state.validator_set_change_slot = s + CYCLE_LENGTH`

Because we want to capture that it happened _now_ rather than a cycle ago, and we have't yet updated the `last_state_recalculation_slot`
